---
layout: post
title: I've Made My First App - Now What?
date: '2015-01-13 14:42:47'
---

<div style="text-align: center;"><i>To move past the moment of 'completion', chase after magical unicorns</i>.</div>
<hr />
I have come to the moment every developer dreams of but so often eludes the young and unwary. My teammates and I, far from simply prototyping or beta-releasing, after so many grueling and excruciating testing and defects, yet coupled with hours of exciting innovation and creative design, have finally created our first ever, full-featured web application.

Oh sure, I have a few applications which were deemed 'completed' before, since they had been bug-tested for a specific list of requirements. Completed in a broad sense would include a number of minuscule and minor apps which I've been a part of&mdash;but <i>my definition of 'complete' is not so narrow</i>.

<strong>I believe most developers dream big about their apps</strong>, they see a future for their scope and capabilities which are far-removed from its current status and bleak lack of resources. They hold the vision in their head because, in spite of the way the app looks in its nascent and untested form, it beholds glory and awe in the developer's mind.

Yet so often in our eagerness to gather a following or earn stakeholder's trust or even prove something to ourselves developers&mdash;not unlike myself (like at all)&mdash;rush ideas through the prototyping stages and label an app <i>complete</i> long before it has reached that dream stage. Then the app dies prematurely, as so often happens with any app good or ill-conceived. Applications, both mobile and web, have a difficult proving ground to compete in and most will never make it to the glory we envision and desire. Yet <strong>perhaps our apps fail not because they are bad ideas or aren't marketed correctly, but because we have not yet <i>completed</i> what the app could be.</strong>
<h2>Adjust What You Mean By Complete</h2>
For most developers, the task of creating an app from start to finish is to work in stages. It is incredibly difficult to flesh out an entire idea with a singular sprint of energy and inspiration, while prototyping atoms of the application's molecular structure eventually builds towards a combined whole down the road. These stages are variously named 'prototyping', 'alpha', 'version 0.5.0', etc. and there are semblances of completion in each of them. The app is 'complete' relative to the stage it is at.

<strong>The tricky part is knowing what to do after you say your app is 'complete'.</strong> If you are at an early stage in your overall complete goal, you either look for traction among your stakeholders and product owners (if you yourself are not the product owner), or you look for your next bit of inspiration to get you onto the next stage of your app's life. But you have to be honest with yourself and ask this very soul-searching question:
<blockquote>Does my app do what I dreamed it eventually could do or has it simply met one of its early stages of completion?</blockquote>
And this is not the easiest question to answer. For instance my team has been working on our application our application since June '14: we mocked out a prototype in 2 months, formed a pilot user group after 4 months, and are releasing after nearly 7 months of development. We were at different stages of release along the way, moving through integers of versioning and envisioning the moment we could release version 1.0, but we discovered along the way that <strong>there were some things that would not make it into our initial release of the app</strong> and would have to be slated for a later release. What we had hoped to accomplish back at our first off-site in June was too much to burden our initial release with, and so we had to deliver a 'complete' though 'incomplete' application.

<strong>We took an application to our full release and it was complete in a <i>relative</i> sense</strong>, and I think that is all a team should feel compelled to do. The reality is: development takes time and feedback, it is not easy to develop with limited resources, time, and expectations from supporters and target users. Thus it is perfectly acceptable to be <i>complete in stages</i>, but should you lose sight of your overall goals and high aspirations for your application's function and design, you might never get to the feeling my team and I are having right now.
<h2>Do Go Chasing Magical Unicorns</h2>
In reality, my team 'completed' this application months ago. As early as 3 months prior, our pilot users were telling us they would start using the app as-is and didn't want to wait for us to come to our version of <i>complete</i>. Even without bugs that necessarily had to be fixed, our team would have been ashamed to have released the app so far away from our expectations of a <i>complete</i> app. We had dreams, see, of <i>magical unicorns</i>: we wanted the design to look slicker, the CSS transitions to be smoother, the Angular <code>watchers</code> to be smaller, the LESS to compile on a remote MID server, integration with GitHub, additional task types available to configure and use in the app, an elusive bug frequent yet almost unrepeatable that needed to be fixed, etc. So we went after them because we knew it would take <i>magical unicorns</i> to get closer to our envisioned <i>complete</i> app.

<strong>Our product owner and stakeholders worried we expanded the scope too much and too often</strong> and they were right in saying so. We weren't targeting an MVP, as it's called: a Minimum Viable Product. As developers we had dreams of <i>magical unicorns</i> and we often spent late hours innovating on them. Any developer knows that feeling of jumping to a new idea that's outside the scope and yet would benefit the project so well, so it requires time outside of work and into our personal time so managers hesitate to encourage.

We used whatever time we could find outside work to innovate and bring the app closer to the <i>complete</i> stage we envisioned. We still have a backlog of ideas which we'll spin out in future iterations and our innovating feels like it has only just begun. <strong>Our idea of a <i>complete</i> app will require chasing more <i>magical unicorns</i></strong> which elude our capture in the normal work hours, for <strong>if we don't chase them, our app will taper and infinitely hover below 100%</strong> and we will not be as pleased as we are today.

As a way of summary, I want to mention an article on Medium I read this morning which inspired me to write this. Melissa Mandelbaum's <a href="https://medium.com/@lissalauren/balancing-short-and-long-term-product-thinking-c88d9b51452b" target="_blank">Balancing Short and Long Term Product Thinking</a> is a short and simple read which mentions a lot of Apple's own product planning. I agreed with her and wanted to simply expand on what our notion of a <i>complete</i> app is. Always ask yourself: have I reached the fullest potential of my app or am I not at one of its earlier stages? To progress past this moment of <i>completion</i>, go dream up and chase after some <i>magical unicorns</i>.